Relative Performance of Colour Constancy Methods

1)
Both images appear to be taken under an illuminant that is dominant in specific colour channels.

Max-RGB appears to work relatively well on both images. The method relies on the assumption that the maximum reflectance in each colour channel in the scene under the unknown illuminant should map to an achromatic reflectance under the canonical illuminant. This appears to be a good assumption; the new RGB gamut of the images is proportionally scaled in each colour channel so that all colour channels are represented equally after the colour correction. That is, the less dominant colour channels are scaled up more heavily than the dominant colour channel, eliminating the colour-channel bias from the unknown illuminant, and creating an image that looks like it was taken under the canonical illumination.

Gray-World appears to work well on the image of the book, but not on the image of the checkered colours. The method assumes that the average reflectance in each colour channel in the scene under the unknown illuminant should map to an achromatic reflectance under the canonical illuminant. This assumption is valid if all colours in the scene under the canonical illuminant are equally represented. For the image of the book this assumption is valid, however for the image of the checkered colours, the assumption does not hold as the “blues” and “greens” in the image under the canonical illuminant are likely more represented than the reds for example. Thus, it appears that the gray-world method overcompensates in this regard by amplifying the “reds” drastically more so than the other colour channels.

Gray-Edge appears to work well on the image of checkered colours, but not as well on the image of the book for the parameters (minkowski-norm order: 0.35, gradient-order: 3); however, it is observed that decreasing the order of the derivative and increasing the order of the Minkowski Norm improves the results of the colour constancy for the image of the book (e.g. minkowski-norm order: 7, gradient-order: 1). The method assumes that the p-th Minkowski Norm of the absolute value of the n-th order derivative in each colour channel in the scene under the unknown illuminant is proportional to that resulting from an achromatic reflectance under the canonical illuminant. If these functions of the spatial derivatives of the image under the canonical illuminant are equally represented for all colour channels (perhaps similar colour gradients across the image), then the method will likely work well. The parameters of the Minkowski Norm and the derivative order allow us to create good calibrations where this assumption holds. For example, the image of the book has smooth colour gradients, so to satisfy this aforementioned assumption, we should take the order of the p-th norm to be relatively high (for better discrimination), and the order of the gradient derivative to be fairly low (as higher order derivatives will have limited information). On the other hand, for the image of checkered colours where the colour gradients can change quite sharply, (e.g. from a coloured square to the black tablet), we can satisfy the assumption by taking higher order derivatives (where we still contain a reasonable level of information), and smaller p-th norm orders (to dampen differences in derivatives between colour channels under the canonical illuminant).

2)
The Max-RGB image has the largest gamut since it scales up each colour channel proportionally to the maximum colour channel level in the image. The gamut of the Gray-World method is bottlenecked by the least represented colour channel in the scene, and will scale down other colour channels to get the “correct” average. The size of the gamut of the Gray-Edge method can potentially be made quite large, but this depends on the parameters we have chosen, and will not scale each colour channel to the same level, but will scale each colour channel to achieve similar p-th Minkowski Norm of the absolute value of the n-th order derivatives. Since the p-th Minkowski Norm still represents a sort of average, the size of the gamut of the method will be bottlenecked by the colour channel with the smallest spatial derivatives.